To solve our
engineering problem,
we will introduce what we’ll
call the “digital abstraction”.
The key insight is to use the
continuous world of voltages
to represent some small, finite
set of values, in our case,
the two binary
values, “0” and “1”.
Keep in mind that the world
is not inherently digital,
we would simply like to engineer
it to behave that way, using
continuous physical phenomenon
to implement digital designs.
As a quick aside, let
me mention that there
are physical phenomenon
that are naturally digital,
i.e., that are
observed to have one
of several quantized values,
e.g., the spin of an electron.
This came as a surprise
to classical physicists
who thought measurements
of physical values
were continuous.
The development
of quantum theory
to describe the finite number of
degrees of freedom experienced
by subatomic
particles completely
changed the world of
classical physics.
We’re just now starting to
research how to apply quantum
physics to computation and
there’s interesting progress
to report on building
quantum computers.
But for this course, we’ll
focus on how to use classical
continuous phenomenon to
create digital systems.
The key idea in using
voltages digitally is to have
a signaling convention
that encodes only one bit
of information at a time, i.e.,
one of two values, “0” or “1”.
We’ll use the same uniform
representation for every
component and wire in
our digital system.
It’ll take us three attempts
to arrive at a voltage
representation that
solves all the problems.
Our first cut is
the obvious one:
simply divide the range of
voltages into two sub-ranges,
one range to represent “0”,
the other to represent “1”.
Pick some threshold
voltage, V_TH,
to divide the range in two.
When a voltage V is less
than the threshold voltage,
we’ll take it to represent
a bit value of 0.
When a voltage V is greater
than or equal to the threshold
voltage, it will represent
a bit value of 1.
This representation
assigns a digital value
to all possible voltages.
The problematic part
of this definition
is the difficulty
in interpreting
voltages near the threshold.
Given the numeric value
for a particular voltage,
it’s easy to apply the rules and
come up with the corresponding
digital value.
But determining the
correct numeric value
accurately gets
more time consuming
and expensive as the voltage
gets closer and closer
to the threshold.
The circuits involved would
have to be made of precision
components and run in
precisely-controlled physical
environments
— hard to accomplish when
we consider the multitude
of environments and the
modest cost expectations
for the systems
we want to build.
So although this definition
has an appealing mathematical
simplicity, it’s not workable
on practical grounds.
This one gets a big red “X”.
In our second attempt, we’ll
introduce two threshold
voltages: V_L and V_H.
Voltages less than or equal to
V_L will be interpreted as 0,
and voltages greater
than or equal to V_H
will be interpreted as 1.
The range of voltages
between V_L and V_H is called
the “forbidden zone”, where we
are forbidden to ask for any
particular behavior
of our digital system.
A particular system
can interpret
a voltage in the forbidden
zone as either a 0 or a 1,
and is not even required
to be consistent
in its interpretation.
In fact the system
is not required
to produce any interpretation at
all for voltages in this range.
How does this help?
Now we can build a
quick-and-dirty voltage-to-bit
converter, say by using a
high-gain op-amp and reference
voltage somewhere in
the forbidden zone
to decide if a given voltage
is above or below the threshold
voltage.
This reference voltage doesn’t
have to be super-accurate,
so it could be
generated with, say,
a voltage divider built
from low-cost 10%-accurate
resistors.
The reference could
change slightly
as the operating temperature
varied or the power supply
voltage changed, and so on.
We only need to guarantee
the correct behavior
of our converter for voltages
below V_L or above V_H.
This representation is pretty
promising and we’ll tentatively
give it a green
checkmark for now.
After a bit more discussion,
we’ll need to make one more
small tweak before we get
to where we want to go.